---
layout: post
title: Nutritional Science Complexities
subtitle: Things to Consider in the Nutrition Science Field
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [Nutrition, Science Communication]
---

  Nutritional science is a field that observes how biology reacts to nutrient intake (food) with the common goal of using this knowledge to promote optimized living (good health). To study this, nutritional scientists have taken many approaches. Some ask questions at the community level assessing things like how breakfast programs in schools effect school performance and behavior. Others use a clinical approach to identify things like how a specific diet or nutrient effects health outcomes (say, cholesterol) compared to a control group. Some utilize animal models or cell culture approaches to limit confounding variables and ask molecular chemistry questions. These methods incorporate different techniques and use different tools (surveys, blood tests, tissue biopsies, DNA or RNA sequencing, etc.) to shed light on their questions and have led to incredible insights on how the human body works. Yet, despite being in the most technology advanced era, we still see raising rates of obesity, Type 2 Diabetes, heart disease, and autoimmunity. Why has nutritional science research failed to produce a recipe for good health? 

  One challenge in nutritional science research is simply defining what healthy is. If you ask a room full of people, ”What does it mean to be healthy?”, there will probably be a general consensus that it involves a lack of disease, being able to take physical care of themselves, and having mental wellness… but if you press for specifics the responses will likely vary drastically. One person may perceive health as the ability to be as strong as possible. For another, they may perceive health as being as smart as possible. And another may be focused on anything that helps them achieve 100 years. To achieve each variation of “good health” these people would be prescribed different regimens, so you may be wondering- who is right? The definition of healthy is partly defined by what you are trying to accomplish, yet overall the science is pretty clear on a few of the following habits. Eat whole foods, exercise, sleep, cultivate mental health practices, and understand that none of these components are isolated from the others. 

  Focusing on the food components of health, food is composed of macro and micronutrients; macronutrients are proteins, fats, and carbohydrates, and micronutrients are vitamins and minerals. Macros are used for energy while micros serve roles in chemical reactions and processes like cell signaling, assisting in chemical reactions, and maintaining cellular osmolarity, to name a few. Researchers have been asking what the golden ratio of macros are for decades and unfortunately an answer has never been clear. You may have heard of several of these diets- DASH, Atkins, South Beach, or Ketogenic- each with their own magic ratio of macros. While they all have credible research studies supporting their success in particular cohorts of volunteers, none are attributed to universal weight loss nor effortless weight management. In addition, asking what the golden ratio of macros ignores many other important aspects of health and healthy nutrition. 

  This has led researchers to hypothesize that dietary patterns may be more informative than a nutrient reductionist approach. A diet pattern consists of a person’s habitual intake of foods and food groups, whereas a reductionist approach asks what the effect of a specific food component is- say Vitamin B3, for example- on a system. Perhaps the dietary pattern that has received the most praise in the last decade is the Mediterranean Diet. Characterized by high levels of omega-3 fatty acids, nuts, legumes, and fatty fish it has been associated with lower rates of chronic diseases. The Mediterranean diet is often contrasted with the Typical American Diet or the Western Diet- one characterized with more refined food, less fiber, and more corn and soy oils. Yet, despite these observations accurately measuring food intake remains really hard and limits the conclusions researchers can make in many studies. In fact, most methods of diet-data collection rely on participants to recall all foods, supplements, and beverages consumed within a certain time window.  Although scientists can measure a blood marker to the microliter, food recalls are error and bias prone- and usually the best we have. 

  Looking past the challenges in diet data collection we reach different hurdles. The cost of sequencing genomes has dropped so drastically that the allure of “personalized medicine” or “precision health” is drawing people like me to pursue careers inspired by this grandiose idea. Imagine, what if I fed you a specific meal, took your blood as you metabolized the nutrients, collected a stool sample, swabbed your cheek for DNA, and was able to give you health advice such as which foods to eat and which ones to stay away from. While this is an extremely exciting prospect, I don’t believe we have enough concrete data to make precise recommendations yet. A few reasons why precision health is still in its infancy are limitations in understanding exactly what it large multi-omic data is telling us, and difficulties predicting how health advice should fluctuate as aspects in environment change (if you get less sleep, are stressed, or get a cold, for example). Nevertheless, this is an active area of research and several nutrient-genotype relationships have been discovered. 

  With all of these complexities, it is no wonder scientific studies often contradict each other or produce confusing results that are easily misinterpreted by non-experts. However, there are many reasons to be excited and to stay engaged with nutritional science. The field is actively developing technologies to overcome these obstacles. For example, as wearable devices become better at tracking movement, heartrate, and sleep they are increasingly useful tools in human studies. As the biotech industry expands, multi-omic sequencing becomes more accessible and insightful and bioinformatic tools and machine learning algorithms needed to understand the large datasets continue to improve. Science is also becoming more and more collaborative! The global health crisis has provided a platform for microbiologists, geneticists, nutritionist, and immunologists to work together to solve universal problems. This is shedding light and new perspectives on old problems. These efforts have already advanced our understanding of complex living systems and will continue to do so. 
